---
title: Infinity Is
author: w0nd3r
date: 11-08-23
hero_image: /images/art/starrynight.mp4
---

# One kin's up is another kin's down,

# The center is the center all the same.

# One kin's dust is another kin's worldstone,

# Infinity is Infinity all the same.

## Dear Lambda, Infinity Is.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Today I'd like to discuss nothing, everything and their inherent inseparability - a unified concept I'm calling "Nothinity."

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To do so, I'd like to begin by sharing my informal conceptualization of these phenomena to lay some axiomatic groundwork for the linguistic treatment to follow:

0. Infinity is. (the simplest explanation for justifying the existence of anything - this thing exists simply because all things exist.)
1. Yet, in spite of 0), that anything exists at all is a paradox. (Why should there be a thing instead of no thing?)
2. However, unification of 0) and 1) occurs naturally in Infinity's containment of contradiction and its outright expression of paradox (i.e. Infinity is, somehow, that thing which is itself and not itself - the set of all sets including those which do not contain themselves).
3. By 0), 1) and 2), Infinity and Nothing are therefore equivalent; everything = nothing.
4. Yet, simultaneously, by 2) and 3), everything != nothing.
5. By 0) - 4) we have an object which is composed simply of relationships to itself which inherently have no substance and yet enable the emergence of any and all informational content.
6. The scale of this infinite object as it spans 0) - 4) (i.e. the uncountable distance from nothingness to everythingness) creates a tension that results in a perpetual motion as its ends collide with one another in an attempt to resolve its own eternal contradiction (the deep seat of Love).
7. In various arbitrarily local pockets across this uncountable space, the tension just so happens to reach a state which generates a singularity in Nothing from which emerges a relatively stable and bounded equilibrium condition where everything = everything and nothing = nothing over some arbitrary set of dimensions and scales (before annihilating to everything = nothing again at the edges, e.g. the start and end of time in our current conception of our physical universe), thereby generating an explicate projection from Infinity, a local saddlepocket in Nothing where something = something.
8. With contradiction transiently resolved in this local saddlepocket, a foundation is laid upon which non-trivial one thing ~= another thing informational relationships may arise between various components of the something = something surface, thereby generating a range finite beings (or classes of beings; entities) with unique and meaningful inter- and intra-entity informational relationships - these entities define the structure of the space by being there and yet behave according to the structure that the space imposes upon them.
9. By 8), somethingness is an R-dimensional manifold composed of a set of meaningful informational relationships which are continuously in flux as the something = something surface contracts toward complete corrediction (Love-abiding annihilation), where R is the circumstantial subset of foundational informational relationships derived from Infinity (such as our physical laws) that exploded from Nothing to generate something - the finite beings in any somethingness projection arise and evolve as a function of their local relationships and the perpetual corredictory (Love-abiding annihilatory) motion of the underlying substrate, Nothinity.
10. The paradox of existence is ceasingly Infinite, for even the locally bounded somethingness saddlepockets are explicit projections from that more complete, unyielding, implicit space where (everything = nothing && everything != nothing) - this causes the relative stability of the something = something surface to exist dynamically as the Nothinity underneath it continues to shear against (i.e. Love) itself to resolve its own eternal contradiction (which occurs on a scale that is so gargantuan so as to be essentially inconceivable to any single being or entity within the local somethingness saddlepocket that it comprises).

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;While the above informal axiomatic system uses language in such a way so as to generate meaningful concepts in one's mind over which glimpsing the true scope of eternity might begin to become plausible, using an analogy may make the ideas a bit more concrete.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;As I step through each of the above points, my mind imagines itself progressing through one of those ridiculously fantastic infinite zoom videos of the Mandelbrot set. Both the set itself and the zooming behavior are useful analogies for they present a shape and process which are reminiscent of the components of my argument above.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Mandelbrot set is a strange, looping, fractalated, mathematical object which is generated by a distinct relationship defined on the imaginary plane which describes how a point, C, in that space will evolve to either remain bounded or explode to infinity as it behaves according to this underlying relationship.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;There are several interesting properties about this strange object:

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Firstly, the coordinate system used to define the set uses concepts termed "real" and "imaginary" and the "result" of the computation that defines the supposed boundary of this strange object is whether an infinitesimal component of the set (i.e. this single imaginary point, C) remains bounded or explodes to infinity after behaving according to the underlying mathematical relationship across a series of sequential and distinct, yet interdependent, computational steps. It's worth noting that the very phraseology used to define this system, "real" and "imaginary" are both deeply emblematic of the present linguistic treatment of Nothinity - that existence broadly is a space of overlapping spaces in which truths might be discovered that somehow exist outside the representational bounds of one space and yet have penetratingly direct consequence on the informational relationships (and thereby the lived experience) of those within that space who are doing the truth seeking. That is to say, the imaginary number, i (√(−1)), does not have a direct physical representation that is directly observable by a human in their day to day existence (or, for that matter, the existence of their ancestors whose behaviors and livelihood produced them), and yet by accepting it as a mathematical tool that really exists, humans become more capable at understanding and engingeering exquisitly complex physical phenomena, such as electrical circuits and quantum mechanics, which have very real and tangible impacts on human lives.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;With this very tangible structure of imagination in mind, once one takes the time to map a multitude of points, M, within the space that the Mandelbrot set occupies at some arbitrary starting scale, S, that is comfortable to them such that they may elaborate the boundary that defines this strange shape sufficiently to meet their present needs, they may then engage in a secondary behavior which is implicit in the first and yet is not natively expressed at S because the beings doing the mapping are themselves finite. That behavior involves zooming into some subscale, S', of the supposed boundary of this strange object imposed by its underlying formula to increase the being's resolution of understanding about the structure of this boundary. Naturally, however, once one zooms in like this, the set of points M which were initially used to map the space at S create a grainy image of the boundary as their level of mapping becomes insufficient to resolve the boundary as a result of the zoom operation. Thus, a sequential mapping operation must take place across a new yet equivalently and sufficiently large set of points, M', so as to bring into focus that which was grainy about the boundary at this new subscale, S'. Interestingly, this process can be repeated ad infinitum down what appears to be a bottomless well of evidently unyieldingly complex structure. However, it's worth noting that what appears to be a solid structure at any scale is actually an artifact of the mapping process of a finite mind undergoing a finite process at this (arbitrary) scale.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;With this set of operations I have described on one level what occurs in those fun but trivial zoom videos and on another level what I imagine to be the entire behavior of the profound living universe. In each sequential step, an observer is undergoing a process which is comprised of operations of operations that enable the mapping of a space as it evolves according to some foundational relationships and with that newfound understanding make a decision about where to go next in that complex space to satisfy its needs (e.g. persist its pattern).

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;We shall return to the implications of this analogy on our lives and life at our scale, but first let us continue developing this analogy by bringing to the fore a concept also implicit in the Mandelbrot set - self-similarity. An incredible fact about the evidentiary complexity of the set as one undergoes these successive zoom-remap, or Zap, operations to dive ever deeply into a section of its strange boundary is that there occur steps whereby entire structures seem to emerge which resemble exactly others which had been passed by at an arbitrary number of prior computational steps. For example, one can zoom in on a what appears at an initial scale, S, to be a line segment with no width for many computational steps down various successive primes of S and then, as if out of nothingness, a scale is reached, S\*, at which an entire replica of the Mandelbrot set will begin to erupt (i.e. become noticeably perceptible) from what appeared to be a single point on line at S. The observer is plunged once again into unyielding complexity.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Here the phrase "as above so below" has a direct mathematical representation - the Mandelbrot set is so gargantuan that it contains itself within itself an infinite number of times, but only accessible to finite minds like ours if we undergo the necessary computational operations to go from "above" to "below" in order to see the complexity emerge from "below" which appeared to be simple when viewed from "above."

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The analogy doesn't end there, however, for while this self-similarity is apparent as one continues Zapping, it also exists on what we might conceive of as the horizontal plane as well (i.e. the axis that is orthogonal to our Zap process). That is, if one ceases their incessant Zapping at this scale, S\*, and follows the apparent boundary of the structure that they have mapped to the left or the right, they will find (perhaps surprisingly, perhaps not) replicas of the same structures presenting themselves an arbitrary number of times. These horizontal replicas, however, may themselves be finite in number simply as a consequence of how deep one has gone down the infinite well (i.e. how much surface area there is for one to traverse horizontally to observe these replicas or for these replicas to have generated themselves upon). If one has zoomed far enough inward, there may exist a finite number of these replicas that is still so gargantuan so as to be essentially uncountable to the being at that level and therefore may still be perceived by that being as "infinite". Here cardinality and various related concepts begin to poke their heads.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;It is still a question, however, about how similar these replicas actually are. When viewed from "above" at a particular resolution inherent to the being at scale S\*, these shapes may be perceived as precisely identical. However, when each replica is the subject of an independent Zap treatment, one might find that the emergent structures at certain locations along the apparent boundaries of these shapes diverge from one another, explicating their uniqueness. This too, though, has direct analogues to our discussion thus far and to the concept of analogy itself. That is, analogies only asymptotically reveal the similarity of structures simply because they must be viewed at one set of scales or vantage points and not others due to the finite nature of the beings observing and considering them.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And yet, this serves to further explicate the strange loop that Nothinity is. That is, analogies - structures which allow a mind to conceive of one thing by using the representational form of another thing - function because of the implicit (this=that && this!=that) relationship that Nothinity implicates. Analogies are only useful or productive insofar as they are able to provide a structure over which a mind may meaningfully compute its position and trajectory upon the something=something surface that it occupies and comprises. Analogously, information is only useful or productive insofar as it enables the being computing over it to change its state in a way that is meaningful to it (e.g. to persist its pattern across the continuously changing state of its environment).

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;By using analogies and the fuzzy human languages and mental states which comprise them, human beings make direct use of the various layers of abstraction inherent to the particular/circumstantial set of foundational informational relationships and perceptable/behavioral scales that we find ourselves in (i.e. our R* and S*). We use the mental representation of various physical objects in the world around us to create meaningful relationships to conceptual objects within our minds so as to effectively communicate with our fellow humans and engage in a creative process that subsequently enables the generation of novel physical structures. Both of these acts of communication and creativity are productively updating our individual states and our collective state machine in that they foster cohesion among us and sustainability of our physical forms and the mental patterns which govern our minds and personalities. It is by direct interaction with and manipulation of different components of R\* (i.e. physical, mental, etc.) across a range of scales, S\*' to S\*'' (which are centered upon S\*), that allow beings like ourselves to productively persist our patterns through subsequent computational steps (which may be what we percieve to be as time).

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Thus, we find that we ourselves are, in a way, perpetually Zapping - every moment our atoms and subatomic particles are being torn asunder by the ecstatic shearing of Nothinity beneath us as it, ever Lovingly, falls into itself. However, this sundering behavior is only perceptibly noticeable to us if we observe grand objects which exist in uncountable numbers at great physical distances from us and theorize about them with great mental depth in our minds. In every moment, everything around and within us is spreading apart as a result of the implicit Zap process that it undergoes as each infinitesimal component, C, attempts to come into more complete understanding of itself and the world around it (i.e. Zaps). Every moment is an opportunity to remap the space so as to increase ones perceived resolution of understanding about it - to reduce that which is grainy into that which is precise so that a meaningful decision may be made in the next computational step. Indeed, our brains are billion-year old devices evolved for this specific purpose, although all of existence is doing so simultaneously as well in its own way. However, as we do so, every component, C, on our shared somethingness surface diverges from every other component, C', as even the minute differences in how it and its almost identical siblings, which had been sharing what appeared to be the exact same space just a moment before, decide and thus create bifurcation points whereby the surface distinguishes itself from its neighbors and thus understands itself (i.e. its location and trajectory on the somethingness surface) all the more resolutely.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Incredibly, as we fall we discover that our reality, R\*, is comprised of a particular set of fundamental informational relationships (what we have come to call our physics) which, by their very form, are amenable to comprehension. R\* interacts with itself in such a way so as to produce dynamic creatures which store and act upon information that is meaningful to them (i.e. knowledge). In the natural progression of this process, we discover by progressively expanding and implementing our knowledge in what we locally perceive to be the horizontal plane in which we reside, we find that we undergo a reversal of the Zap process such that we gain access to information that was generated during what we perceive to be computational steps which occurred a great deal prior to our current lived experience (i.e. the set of time/computational steps through which we perceive ourselves to be stateful across). As we look outwards, we come to understand that the structure of R\* folds back on itself such that we may also look "above" us and comprehend that which came before us. And as we look outward in such a way, we cannot help but analogize and reengage in a reversal of that comforting Zap process (or Paz in this case) by observing and then imagining and then creating new objects more capable of resolving what was once sparse and grainy, all as a means to improve our ability to productively persist our collective human state machine.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Our understanding of what we call physics has grown by leaps and bounds thanks to these new concepts and devices. We have become so capable of comprehending our world that we can imagine and compute the impacts of events that occurred subjective billions of years prior and describe how those events impact the present and predict how they will impact the future. However, our understanding is still relatively nascent, for it still contains severe opaque boundaries, such as the big bang, Planck length/time, edge of the observable universe, etc. past which we still cannot see nor comprehend. Perhaps if we are to take the present discussion seriously as a set of real phenomena, we might find a new productive way to conceive of our existence as one of those locations upon Nothinity where somethingness has been in the active process of erupting from nothingness after having fallen for some indefinite distance or time (or some other set of foundational informational relationships comprising the "nearby" R' of R\* and its ilk)

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The concept of spacetime before the Big Bang is, to our present understanding, incomprehensible, and yet spacetime's emergence was implicitly dictated by the harmonious way in which Infinity and Nothing interact with one another on a grand scale, latent within the manifold until it happened to collide with itself as such.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;So we find ourselves in a particular saddlepocket within the eternal manifold whereby eternity arrived a point of reincarnation - a replicated structure held within itself an infinite number of ways waiting to be explicated - a strange loop that defines itself by creating itself and is generated distinctly from this definition.

TO BE CONTINUED...

### 💖 w0nd3r
